# Bike Sharing

## Overview
The purpose of this analysis was to use Tableau to create interactive visualizations about Citibike data to determine if creating a Citibike program in Des Moines, Iowa is a practical idea.  We chose to create our visualizations based on New York City Citibike data from August of 2019 found here: https://s3.amazonaws.com/tripdata/index.html.

Once we created our visualizations, we placed them into a Tableau story to display our visualizations more easily. We concluded the project with a brief summary of what can be interpreted from the visualizations, as well as several other possible visualizations that could have been made.  The Tableau Story that we discuss here can be viewed at [link to Tableau Public story].

## Results
Upon downloading the aforementioned Citibike data, we used the Python library Pandas to “clean” the data and format the time values so that we could more easily produce interpretable visualizations.  Once our data had been cleaned, we created a Tableau story that contains our results.  In total, our Tableau story contains seven different visualizations of the NYC Citibike data.  The following is a brief description of each visualization: 
* The first graph we created shows the number of bike rentals vs. the bike user’s trip duration.  We see that there is a very large spike around the 5-10 minute mark that plummets rapidly after approximately 10 minutes.  This makes sense, as many users of Citibike are not typically going to be renting a bike for long trips, especially since the users in the graph are more than likely using Citibike to traverse through crowded sections of New York City. [show picture of # of bikes vs. trip duration]

* The second graph in our Tableau story is again the number of bike rentals vs. the bike user’s trip duration, but this time the data is broken down based on gender.  It is apparent that all genders rented the Citibikes for approximately 5-10 minutes, with the “Unknown” category seemingly renting bikes for slightly longer than males and females.  It also apparent that males make up the vast majority of Citibike rentals.  [picture of # of bikes vs. trip duration based on gender]
*Our third visualization was a pie chart that explicitly shows the viewer the gender breakdown.  We see that of the approximately 2.3 million rows of Citibike data in our dataset, that roughly 1.5 million of the data points are from male users, 600,000 data points are from female users, and 200,000 data points are from users whose gender is classified as “Unknown”.  [show picture of pie chart]

* The fourth visualization we produced was a map of all of the Citibike starting locations.  These locations were placed onto a map of New York City using circular pinpoints, where locations with high numbers of bike rentals being denoted by a pinpoint with a darker shade of blue and a larger size than the surrounding pinpoints. [Picture of starting location map]

* The fifth graph we created was a heat map that shows the viewer the most active times that users were using Citibike.  This was shown both by weekday and by the hour of the starting time for each Citibike rental.  It is apparent from our heatmap that the most active times for Citibike rentals during the week correspond to a typical work schedule (arriving at work between 6:00am and 8:00am and leaving work sometime between 5:00pm and 7:00pm).  Upon clicking on a cell of the heatmap the viewer is shown the hour that the Citibike rentals were initiated, as well as the total number of bike rentals for that particular hour of that particular weekday.  On the weekends, we can see that most users who use Citibike are active around midday.  [show picture of heatmap that shows startime and weekday] 

* The sixth visualization in our Tableau story is very similar to the previous visualization.  The graphs we have created for this section of our story display the same data as the prior visualization, but now broken down by gender.  So, we have three heatmaps, each showing the most active times for bike rentals per hour and per weekday, and now, per gender.  Our heatmaps again support the conclusion that males are the predominant users of Citibike, and it seems that the previous Citibike trends relative to hours of activity hold across all genders, i.e., the most active times are midday for weekends and typical starting and ending work hours for weekdays). [show picture of multiple heatmaps based on gender]

* The seventh visualization we produced is a heatmap that shows the breakdown of Citibike usage based on the user subscription type and gender for each day of the week.  Users of Citibike can opt to engage in a one-time pay for a bike rental or a long-term subscription.  Our interactive heatmap shown below makes evident that long-term male subscribers are the most active users of Citibike.  It can also be noted that Thursday and Friday appear to be the most active days for Citibike rentals, and that users with a gender classified as “Unknown” are much more actively renting bikes from Citibike on the weekends (especially Saturday) than on weekdays. [show picture of gender breakdown heatmap bike rentals usertype]

## Summary
To recapitulate on the previously mentioned visualizations, we see that the majority of the Citibike users in August of 2019 in New York City use Citibike for less than 10 minutes and are predominantly male.  On weekdays, Citibike users are most active on their way to work and back, and on weekends, Citibike users are most active during the middle of the day.  It was surmised from our seventh visualization that the most active days for Citibike were on Thursday and Friday.  Finally, in addition to this, it was evident that the majority of users were long-term subscribers as opposed to one-time customers.

The visualizations that we have described above show great insights into New York City’s Citibike program.  However, it may be beneficial to have more visualizations to yield a better sense of if Citibike would be practical in Des Moines, Iowa.  For example, we could create a visualization to see if most bike stations (or ending bike destinations) are around other forms of public transit, like New York City’s subway system.  If so, this would suggest people often use Citibike to travel to the subway, which Des Moines does not have.  In addition to this, it would beneficial to know the average age of Citibike users, and to compare this with the average age of the population of Des Moines.  

Both intuitively and from the data presented here, those that would potentially implement a Citibike program in Des Moines should probably be hesitant to do so, given that  Des Moines and New York City are at different ends of the population spectrum.
